What do Steve Jobs, Tony Stark, Bill Gates,
and Elon Musk all have in common?
They're all fictional characters.
Thank you very much. Good morning!
When I first became governor of Judea eight
years ago, I recognised that we needed a totally
new long-term, sustainable approach to innovate the
Roman Empire. Our mission as Romans is to
to invent, design, and inspire the new way of doing things and set people free from the old ways.
What I love about working for the Roman Empire
is that our team is changing the world.
It's awesome to go to work with some of finest
minds who are committed to building a totally
new way of doing almost everything. From politics, to leisure, to taxes, to defence...
The Roman Empire is the network of tomorrow.
So when I saw the headlines about my decision
to execute Jesus of Nazareth I had just one
overriding thought: "How can I better demonstrate
the incredible value that I know the Roman Empire
can deliver?" Because the value of Rome is more than
just order and peace. Much more than that.
It's job opportunities. Infrastructure.
Civil engineering. Security. All these features
combine to make the Roman Empire the
most revolutionary network ever designed
with the power to change ordinary people's
lives for the better. So I have nothing personal
against God but He is a little obsolete.
Thank you very much.
Partie numehau deux - Ceci n'est pas un
Elon Musk
Elon Reeve Musk was born in South Africa in
1971. Having previously owned a slice of PayPal,
and now as the CEO of both Tesla and SpaceX,
as well as having fingers in many other pies,
Musk is the 53rd richest person in the world,
with a net worth of about twenty billion US dollars.
Pontius Pilate was a real historical figure,
who did actually live at the time Jesus is supposed
to have been crucified, and served as Prefect
of Judea from AD 26 to AD 36. Both he and
his wife, Claudia, have at one time or another
been venerated as Saints by various Orthodox
churches, though his role in the fictionalised Bible story is usually to represent someone who seeks
to avoid responsibility for the death of Jesus through the symbolic washing of his hands
before giving the death sentence.
Elon Musk enjoys something of a cult status.
Many people see him as kind of a hero, or
at least an inspiration, and I could talk about his tweets al day or about his personal life but
hey, I'm less curious about Elon Musk the man - Some More News already made that video and it's really good so you can go and watch him
I'm more curious about Elon Musk the myth
- the symbol of the type, the technological
industrial wizard, the Tony Stark/Nicola Tesla
figure of the scientist/industrialist
who breaks with the established way of doing
things and creates something new. And personally although I do love the term Tech Daddy, there is
another term from the 60s for men, and it is often
men, who are mythologised in this way - the
"Comprehensive Designer." Someone who
is a "synthesis of artist, inventor, mechanic,
objective economist and evolutionary strategist."
Funnily enough, how we today think about computers
and technology and Comprehensive Designers
like Elon Musk owes a huge debt to 60s
counterculture. In his book "From Counterculture
to Cyberculture," communications Professor
Fred Turner explains that there were really two
strands to the counterculture of the 1960s. On the one hand you had the Radical Left Wing, who were doing things like registering
new voters, protesting the Vietnam War, starting new political parties and organisations, bringing challenges  to expand civil rights...
And then there were the New Communalists,
who built communes, LSD, free love, rock and roll,
anti-authoritarianism, flower power, peace signs -
the people you probably think of when you
hear "60s counterculture." And really these two strands weren't
all that separate: plenty of hippies protested the Vietnam War and plenty of young radicals did LSD but those were two
trends, the second of which, the New Communalists,
came to be seen in time as cool, which is why we
associate their aesthetic with that particular period of history.
A lot of those who were on the New Communalist hippie scene later got interested in technology
and mingled with the new generation who were building early computers and
the web, and gradually people came to see
computers not as symbols of stuffy corporate
authority but as the digital frontier that would set people free!
Funnily enough since we're talking about
Elon Musk, for a brief window in the mid-70s
space colonies became a countercultural fascination.
The idea of escaping the strictures of what
was known to a new space was just like building
a commune, only in space.
The New Communalists took their values and ideas to teams that built early computers
and the web and gradually the idea of the commune - the
new space that represents rebellion against
the old order - morphed from rural commune to
space commune to digital commune: cyberspace.
This cool new place that's beyond the reach of any
one government or authority.
And so by the 90s, engineers, hackers, and software developers had come to be seen as the new
countercultural heroes, the Comprehensive Designers,
Masters of the new frontier who were gonna
network the globe and tear down all the old systems man!
So that's where the figure of Comprehensive Designer/ Tech Daddy comes from. Now, a Backlash, named
by author Susan Faludi in her book of the
same name, is a period of history where instead
of progress in the fields of rights and equality, the opposite happens. Things get worse, rights get rolled back,
as those whose privilege is challenged by progress fight to defend
that unearned privilege. So Faludi talks a lot
about the Reagan Era as a period of Backlash
for women's rights, lot of stuff got rolled back. Arguably we're living through another Backlash right now.
And the seeds of today's Backlash were already
lying dormant in 60s counterculture. Although
the New Communalists were going
for an egalitarian vibe a lot of communes
tended to be populated by overwhelmingly white, relatively wealthy, educated young people.
Although they were trying to break away from traditional ways of doing things they often reproduced traditional gender roles on the communes;
Some of them ended up marginalising women.
And although they were aiming at independence from the system a lot of them received bankrolling from outside
or were set up in places that actually made life more difficult for the poorer folks who lived nearby.
"And then what America does, while these people are talking, it very, very gradually
builds a Starbucks around them. And then -
They all become addicted to latte and they lose the will to rebel!
They still definitely had their achievements, but just
there were some drawbacks as well. And those
drawbacks continued into 90s digital counterculture.
Wired magazine wrote a lot about how technology,
and the Comprehensive Designers who were mastering
it and were gonna tear down all the old hierarchies.
But although Wired presented itself as openly countercultural its audience
were also overwhelmingly white, male, and
very wealthy, the very people whose material
interests lay in not changing the world too much.
Indeed, Wired was an openly libertarian magazine,
praising right-wing conservative figures like
Newt Gingrich and George Gilder, both of whom
appeared on the cover. They were all about
deregulating the net, man, setting information free! Unfortunately, despite their noble intentions, they sleepwalked right
into legitimising the deregulation of industry more widely, the cutting of welfare, and the massive inequality we have today.
Like the New Communalists of the 60s, the techno-libertarians of the late 80s/early 90s liked to think of themselves as being independent
from the system and creating something new, but they weren't really. They were still entangled within it. A lot of the physical labour of actually assembling
computers was done by undocumented
immigrants, women, and people of colour who didn't
really get a slice of the shiny techno-utopia that was promised on the box. Nowadays a lot of those
dangerous, difficult jobs are done by  workers in state capitalist China, where Elon Musk has just been trying to build his
own factory, incidentally. Similarly, part of the Tech Daddy myth today is that he's a visionary who stands apart
from the system and doesn't need anyone
else: he's "Self-Made." And this is false
for some interesting economic reasons we'll get to shortly, but also on a surface level
it's kindof easy to see through because the technologies that Comprehensive Designers bring to market aren't always the
result of divine or even privately funded inspiration: like the iPhone is an aggregate of a bunch of technologies
that had already been invented through public funding. An impressive invention, absolutely no doubt, but not
exactly Promethean. A lot of "self-made" successful
people, including Elon Musk, had very wealthy parents
already. So Comprehensive Designers as we know them today are kindof like fictional characters. The
myth doesn't match the men.
They are fictional characters with a purpose
though. And in order to understand that purpose,
and where counterculture is today, we re gonna need to talk about Slavoj Žižek and flirting.
Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek coined
the useful term 'Liberal Communists.' And if
you know any political philosophy you'll already
have spotted that this is a contradictory
term, it's like saying 'Square Circle.' A
Liberal, with a Capital L, is someone who maybe
has maybe some progressive social ideas but still thinks that capitalism is okay. Whereas Communists
are a subgroup of Leftists: the sexy, talented people who realise that capitalism is rubbish and it needs to go.
So surely you can't be a Liberal and a Communist? You can't both support
and seek to destroy capitalism?
Žižek knows this and made the term deliberately
contradictory in order to highlight a particular contradiction
in our society, and for my money that contradiction is best expressed
through flirting. Specifically the kind of flirting that consenting people do when they haven't gotten
together yet, but they want to. And the whole game of flirting is saying something that is suggestive
but not putting all your cards on the table
and declaring outright that you fancy the
person, because if you go in there all guns blazing you might end up getting rejected. So you've gotta
maintain a little bit of deniability, not in a creepy "I never said that inappropriate thing"-way,
but just in an ego-protecting way, so the
other person starts to think, "Oh, do they fancy
me? Are they flirting with me? How do I feel about that? I kinda want them to fancy me, maybe I'll say something
a little bit suggestive back and we'll see how it goes down." And that's the brinkmanship, that's the fun, that's the game:
who's gonna break cover first and make an unambiguous move? Who wants it more?
And of course the other person (or people)
probably know that you're doing this, you all
know the game, but it just adds a layer
of fun.
So the whole practice of flirting only
works insofar as you can plausibly disavow that what you're saying reflects what you're thinking.
And what Žižek says is that so much stuff
relies on exactly the same kind of disavowal.
Like wearing a Che Guevara T-shirt, for instance. Wearing a Che Guevara T-shirt that's been mass produced is on some level kinda perverse.
Some poor exploited person probably had to make that T-shirt in a faraway country in terrible conditions
for pennies an hour, and that whole system goes against everything the man whose face is on the shirt fought and died for.
But if I wear it ironically, then I can do
it, because I know that it's bad. I disavow it.
I'm innocent.
I'm innocent...
I am innocent.
I am innocent of this man's blood.
I AM INNOCENT OF THIS MAN'S BLOOD!
CRUCIFY HIM!
I wash my hands of this!
And the key point is that like flirting my wearing the Che Guevara T-shirt actually depends on me disavowing
it. Pontius Pilate can't sentence Jesus to death until he's washed his hands first. The disavowal is central to the  whole operation.
But I still wear the shirt. Particularly
under capitalism we focus a lot on people's intentions:
I wear the Che Guevara T-shirt but I'm not a bad person because I didn't intend anything bad by it, I know that it's bad,
unlike some imaginary person who wears it because they like the pattern I guess - Elon Musk might not get things right all the time but at least his intentions are good! And Žižek
says it ain't about what you intend to do, it's not about what you believe in your heart or whether
you're a good person, it's about the material effect your actions have on the world.
So forget the flirting and just tell me straight up: are we gonna leave it?
Or are we gonna get in that bedroom and
So Liberal Communists are bigtime capitalists: millionaires, billionaires, business owners,
who simultaneously wash their hands of capitalism
through their actions. Like Bill Gates, former
hacker, huge countercultural icon
in his day, huge business owner now,
but gives millions away to charity: a fundamentally
anticapitalist move because you're giving
money away rather than investing it expecting
returns. Ma boy Elon - Cave Daddy Maximum,
MC Tesla - gives free batteries to Puerto Rico. Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon, gives millions to medical research at Princeton.
And of course, George Soros. How could we forget Georgie?
I could even name some millionaire Liberal Communists on the YouTube scene; if it weren't for the off chance they'd be watching.
Now don't get me wrong: charity, grants, batteries, those can be amazing. Change lives. Save lives! But in order
to give wealth you first have to take wealth,
or as some would put it, "create" wealth.
And here we're getting into the deep economic reasons that explode the Tech Daddy myth - profit
is generated by the workers. If you're a
capitalist, you can throw as much money as
you want at a block of wood it will not
turn into a chair.
INVESTMENT! INVESTMENT! INVESTMENT!
You can throw as much money as you like at
a sheet of metal, it will not turn into a
Tesla. It only turns into something you can sell
for profit because somebody puts in the time
and works on it, and in order to make that
profit you mathematically have to pay that
person less than the value they added to the starting materials. That's true of people who work in factories
it's true of people who build the robots that replace people who work in factories workers, it's
true of YouTubers, it's true of people who pull pints in the pub and people who work in the HR departments
of massive corporations. You are always being
paid less than the true monetary value of your
work, and the only way to get the full amount
is if instead of the boss owning the factory
and everything that gets made in it, the workers between them cut out the middle man and own it together. Which is what we call socialism.
But under capitalism, every penny of a billionaire's fortune is a penny of  unpaid work that someone else did.
In addition, and this is a big deal whether you're a Marxist or you're not cool, Liberal Communists
have every incentive to protect their wealth
and the means by which they acquire it, and
that means getting involved in politics, and
they do. It's common knowledge now that
ol' Elon gives millions to both of America's political parties: and although they aren't
both exactly the same, they do both support
capitalism. He also discourages his
Maybe that's slightly unfair. Or at least potentially legally dodgy...
Elon?
Elon mate. Is it - y'alright? -  is it fair to say that you discourage your employees from unionising?
Well you don't encourage it? Okay, that's
fair.
There are some sneakier tactics too: most
every billionaire will have a charitable foundation
named after them, like the Gates Foundation,
and some of the money from those goes to political
think tanks who advise governments.
And they ain't the political think tanks
recommending we abolish billionaires. That
is a little bit more like an investment only
the product is your engineered political consent.
And here's the real kicker from Mark Fisher,
"Far from constituting any kind of progressive
alternative to official capitalist ideology,
liberal communism constitutes the dominant
ideology of capitalism now." The legacy
of 60s counterculture into 90s digital
counterculture is that an opportunity for genuine transformation wasn't quite followed through all the way,
but the aesthetics of counterculture, of the Comprehensive Designer and the tech rebel, became very fashionable.
Nowadays capitalism sells us symbols of anti-capitalist
resistance because as long as we're consuming
those symbols - wearing the Che Guevara
T-shirt, watching the movie where the bad guy
is an evil corporation, praising wealth hoarders for their generosity or people who got
where they are because of their workers as
visionaries who did it alone - as long as
evolution is sold as revolution, the actual revolution - the substantive break with everything that has come before - is delayed. That doesn't mean that
all of those movies and artworks and even Teslas aren't great fun,
Ya like jazz?
but it does mean that the Tech Daddy isn't a figure of counterculture; it's an advertising mascot for backlash.
"Why are you cheering, Fry? You're not rich!"
"True. But someday I might be rich. And then people like me better watch their step!"
As a final thought, the character of the Tech Daddy is used to sell Backlash to men, but similar tactics
are being employed to sell it to people of other genders too. Today's counterculture includes
trans-inclusive tendencies, feminist tendencies,  the widespread acceptance of lesbian, gay, and bisexual people,
and we're already seeing those features
of it being used to wallpaper media aimed at women
that's really just about getting advertising
clicks. There are corporations who have floats
in the London Pride Parade who sell weapons to countries that use those weapons on LGBT people.
Counterculture will have the anticapitalist strains removed, and what's left will be used to sell you shit.
Just a couple days ago I was at Summer in
the City, a big YouTube convention here in the
UK, and I was on a panel and I brought up the fact that the cameras and laptops we YouTubers use to do our jobs, contain
within them Coltan. Coltan is a conflict
mineral. The extraction of coltan in the Democratic
Republic of Confo is doing massive social, economic, and environmental damage.
And that's not even getting into to the poor buggers out in China who are gonna be assembling all tis electronics
in factory dormitories in absolutely terrible conditions being horribly exploited
building the same machine that I will actually use to edit this video.
And when I brought this up I was quite shocked: there was another YouTuber on the panel
who by all accounts is very progressive and very lovely who completely vehemently dismissed
these concerns. Who said, "I'm here to speak for my audience!" and I said, "Okay cool:
I wonder who's gonna speak up for all the people who do the actual material work that puts us on this stage though?" And he just went, "Not me!"
Which is less, "I wash my hands of this," and more, "Ah, a little BLOOD never hurt anybody!" Abblllblabblllblbbll...
And here's my big question that I genuinely ask myself quite a lot - is this same process of counterculture into backlash happening to us?
To YouTube? To Leftist YouTube in particular? As our channels get bigger, as we start employing people like research
assistants and musicians and we start selling T-shirts, getting invited to industry
parties and movie premiers... Are we gonna end up just emptily disavowing and washing our hands of it all?
Are we gonna wake up one day ad look in the mirror and not recognise who's looking back at us because instead of our face
it's just the pallid, shrimp-eyed face...
of Elon Reeve Musk?
Well did you hear, there's a natural order?
Those most deserved will end up with the most.
That the cream cannot help but always rise
up to the top?
Well I say: Shit floats.
If you thought things had changed,
Friend you'd better think again,
Bluntly put in the fewest of words,
Musks are still running the world...
Now the working classes are obsolete,
They are surplus to society's needs,
So let 'em all kill each other,
And get it made overseas.
That's the word, don'tcha know,
From the guys that's running the show,
Let's be perfectly clear boys and girls,
Oh, Musks are still running the world,
Munts are still running the world.
Oh yeah!
Well feed your children on crayfish and Lobster tails,
Find a school near the top of the league,
In theory I respect your right to exist,
I will kill you if you move in next to me!
Oh it stinks, it sucks, it's anthropologically
unjust,
Oh but the takings are up by a third, Oh So Musks are still running the world! Yeah, Musks are still running the world!
Musks are still running the world!
The free market is perfectly natural.
Do you think that I'm some kind of dummy?
It's the ideal way to order the world,
Fuck the morals, does it make any money?
And if you don't like it? Then leave.
Or use your rights to protest on the street,
Yeah, use your rights but don't imagine that
it's heard, Oh no no, cause
Musks are still running the world!
Musks are still running the world! Yeah,
Oh, Musks are still running the world!
Yeah, Musks are still running the world!
MUSKS ARE
STILL RUNNIN'...
THE WOOOOOOOORRRRLLLLLLLLDDDD!
I'm gettin' absolutely eaten alive; I hate shooting outdoors.